the world-renowned Iranian mathematician
maryam miss Akane has died of cancer in
hospital in the United States she was
the first ever female winner of the very
prestigious fueled medal it's considered
the Nobel Prize for mathematics the
award in 2014 was in recognition of her
work on complex geometry she was 40
years old let's speak to dr. tom
crawford a mathematician who's recently
finished his PhD in applied maths he
joins us via webcam from Cambridge thank
you very much for your time her
achievements are absolutely astounding
just explain to us for anybody who
doesn't really understand like myself
included complex geometry dynamical
systems that was why professor mr.
Kearney was given this Nobel Prize for
mathematics what is that um well first
of all just off my condolences to her
family and the mathematical world
because we have really lost at role
model
sort of the first woman to reach the
pinnacle of maths and what she did was
to to link geometry and dynamics
together and geometry is sort of the the
shapes and the sizes and the position of
objects sort of around us and dynamics
relates to forces and the motion these
forces cause and the two are very
intellect so if you think about our
solar system we have a Sun and we have
planets and they're in fixed positions
that's the geometry and then the way the
planets moves the fact that wars on
earth go around the Sun in an ellipse
that's the dynamics of the system and
what Miriam was able to do was to link
these two topics together but not in
something we can visualize like the
solar system she did this in a very
abstract world of sort of curved
mathematical surfaces and to just have
an imagination and to be able to
visualize these things and then to sort
of have all these breakthroughs in that
field was just incredible it sounds
absolutely extraordinary of course she
is a woman she was a woman in the
male-dominated world how significant is
her achievement I think as I eluded to
before it's the Fields Medal is the
mathematical equivalent of the Nobel
and the fact that it took until 2014 for
a woman to win this it sort of shows
just how difficult it perhaps is for
women in maths and how important unlike
the legacy the Mayans left behind here
because if you think about something
like physics they had Marie Curie won
the the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1903
and yet it took almost one hundred and
ten more years before a woman was sort
of reaching the top of you know as high
as you can get in the field of maths and
she really was a just a trailblazer and
just a fantastic role model for young
women who want to go into science and go
into math in particular why do you think
it's been so hard for women to do that
then I think a lot of it is um it seems
to be the sort of professorship level
from I'm mainly speaking here from
experience so that I think we're
improving women's studying maths at
school and then at university and then
going on to graduate studies we're sort
of getting better but it's then that
next step so once you sort of complete
your PhD then to become a lecturer at
university or sort of obtain a
professorship sort of a chair position
at a university they tend to just just
always seem to go to two men and I think
it's only recently now we've started to
see the shift with more women obtaining
these positions and that is definitely
in part to to the work of Miriam and the
fact that she was able to obtain you
know the top position the top award you
can get as a mathematician as a woman
and the first woman to do that
absolutely extraordinary well thank you
very much dr. Tom Crawford and
congratulations because of course you've
just recently finished your PhD in
applied mathematics amazing thank you so
much for your time